posts/shuffle.md, before:

The Naive Shuffle Algorithm
===========================

As programmers, we are often told never to write code that someone else has
written for us.  Using a library function usually means gains in productivity,
as well as some level of code quality guarantee. Usually this is enough, but
sometimes we decide to go ahead and reimplement something anyways. The other
day, someone asked me why this is a bad idea. This blog post is an attempt at
an answer to this question.

Imagine you were writing an application in which you needed to shuffle a
string. Instead of looking up the standard library function, you decided to
implement it yourself because a shuffle is a simple piece of code and it would
be quicker to write it than it would be to go to the documentation and find the
right function. Besides, implementing things like this is fun right? Here is a
simple shuffle algorithm.

```python
import random

def naive(input):
    input = list(input)
    n = len(input)
    for i in range(n):
        j = random.randint(0,n-1)
        input[i], input[j] = input[j], input[i]

    return "".join(input)
```

This code works by iterating through the list and swapping the current element
with another random element. If you are not familiar with shuffle algorithms it
may be difficult to see where this code is broken. The break is so subtle that
it may go years without being detected. First, let's see what happens when we
run it.

```python
# Create a counter object
n_counter = {
    "123": 0,
    "132": 0,
    "213": 0,
    "231": 0,
    "312": 0,
    "321": 0,
}

# Shuffle 10000 times for a good statistical sample
for _ in range(10000):
    n_counter[naive("123")] += 1
```

![png](images/output_3_0.png)

Looking at this image, it should be clear that the shuffle function is unfairly
favoring some permutations over others. To figure out why, the easiest
explanation requires some basic math.  For any string of length `n`, there are
`n!` possible permutations. In our naive shuffle algorithm, there are `n^n`
possible code paths. This is because at each of `n` elements, there are `n`
possible choices for which element to swap it with (including itself).  For the
simple example `"123"` where `n=3`, there are `3^3 = 27` possible code paths.
With `3! = 6` different possible permutations of the array, it is clear that
each of the 6 possible shuffles cannot be equally represented by 27 code paths,
as 3 does not evenly divide 27.

The possible permutations are as follows

    123 132 213 231 312 321

The possible code paths of the naive algorithms:

```
123
 +- 123          - swap 1 and 1 (these are positions,
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 1  not numbers)
 |   |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 2
 |   |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 132      - swap 2 and 3
 |       +- 231  - swap 3 and 1
 |       +- 123  - swap 3 and 2
 |       +- 132  - swap 3 and 3
 +- 213          - swap 1 and 2
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 1
 |   |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 2
 |   |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 231      - swap 2 and 3
 |       +- 132  - swap 3 and 1
 |       +- 213  - swap 3 and 2
 |       +- 231  - swap 3 and 3
 +- 321          - swap 1 and 3
     +- 231      - swap 2 and 1
     |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 1
     |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 2
     |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 3
     +- 321      - swap 2 and 2
     |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 1
     |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 2
     |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 3
     +- 312      - swap 2 and 3
         +- 213  - swap 3 and 1
         +- 321  - swap 3 and 2
         +- 312  - swap 3 and 3
```

It is easy to see that 123 is possible 4 times and 132 is possible 5 times out
of the 27 code paths. Assuming a good rng (all paths are equally likely), this
means 132 is more likely to be output than 123. Now let's see the Fisher-Yates
shuffle algorithm.  It is _almost_ the same as our naive algorithm, but for one
simple change. As it iterates through the list, at each element it chooses a
random _later_ element (or itself) rather than just choosing a random element.

```python
def fisheryates(input):
    input = list(input)
    l = len(input)
    for i in range(l):
        j = random.randint(i,l-1)
        input[i], input[j] = input[j], input[i]

    return "".join(input)
```

Intuitively, it would seem that this algorithm is less random. Wouldn't it be
worse to limit yourself to only swapping with later elements? Let's test this
algorithm the same way we tested our naive algorithm.

```python
# Create a counter object
fy_counter = {
    "123": 0,
    "132": 0,
    "213": 0,
    "231": 0,
    "312": 0,
    "321": 0,
}

# Shuffle 10000 times
for _ in range(10000):
    fy_counter[fisheryates("123")] += 1
```


![png](images/output_7_0.png)


As seen in the example above, the output of this function is much more fair.
To see why this is, let's go through the same math we did before.  For the
Fisher-Yates algorithm, let's figure out how many possible code paths there
are.  At the first element, there are `n` possible choices (all elements in the
array), at the second element, there are `n-1` possible choices (ignore all
earlier elements), continue this all the way until the last element.  `n *
(n-1) * (n-2) * (n-3) * ... * 2 * 1 = n!`, which leaves us with `n!` possible
code paths.  This is encouraging since it is the same number of possible
permutations, therefore it is at least *possible* that every output is equally
likely. This is a strong improvement over *impossible*.  For the simple example
`"123"` where `n=3`, there are `3! = 3*2*1 = 6` possible code paths.  With `3!
= 6` different possible permutations of the array, it is clear that 6 divides 6
and the algorithm is not yet proven broken as it was for the naive algorithm.

The possible permutations are as follows

```
123 132 213 231 312 321
```

The possible code paths of the Fisher-Yates algorithms:

```
123
 +- 123          - swap 1 and 1
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 2
 |   +- 132      - swap 2 and 3
 |
 +- 213          - swap 1 and 2
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 2
 |   +- 231      - swap 2 and 3
 |
 +- 321          - swap 1 and 3
     +- 321      - swap 2 and 2
     +- 312      - swap 2 and 3
```

It is easy to see that every possible output shows up once and is therefore
(assuming a good rng) equally likely.

Commit message:

change some wording in shuffle post

posts/shuffle.md, after:

The Naive Shuffle Algorithm
===========================

### Aside from saving time, why are programmers always told not to write code
that has been written for us?

Imagine you were writing an application in which you needed to shuffle a
string. Instead of looking up the standard library function, you decided to
implement it yourself because a shuffle is a simple piece of code and it would
be quicker to write it than it would be to go to the documentation and find the
right function. Besides, implementing things like this is fun right? Here is a
simple shuffle algorithm.

```python
import random

def naive(input):
    input = list(input)
    n = len(input)
    for i in range(n):
        j = random.randint(0,n-1)
        input[i], input[j] = input[j], input[i]

    return "".join(input)
```

If you can already see the problem with this code then congratulations, you
don't need to read the rest of this post.  This code works by iterating through
the list and swapping the current element with another random element. If you
are not familiar with shuffle algorithms it may be difficult to see where this
code is broken. The break is so subtle that it may go years without being
detected. First, let's see what happens when we run it.

```python
# Create a counter object
n_counter = {
    "123": 0,
    "132": 0,
    "213": 0,
    "231": 0,
    "312": 0,
    "321": 0,
}

# Shuffle 10000 times for a good statistical sample
for _ in range(10000):
    n_counter[naive("123")] += 1
```

![png](images/output_3_0.png)

Looking at this image, it should be clear that the shuffle function is unfairly
favoring some permutations over others. To figure out why, the easiest
explanation requires some basic math.  For any string of length `n`, there are
`n!` possible permutations. In our naive shuffle algorithm, there are `n^n`
possible code paths. This is because at each of `n` elements, there are `n`
possible choices for which element to swap it with (including itself).  For the
simple example `"123"` where `n=3`, there are `3^3 = 27` possible code paths.
With `3! = 6` different possible permutations of the array, it is clear that
each of the 6 possible shuffles cannot be equally represented by 27 code paths,
as 3 does not evenly divide 27.

The possible permutations are as follows

    123 132 213 231 312 321

The possible code paths of the naive algorithms:

```
123
 +- 123          - swap 1 and 1 (these are positions,
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 1  not numbers)
 |   |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 2
 |   |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 132      - swap 2 and 3
 |       +- 231  - swap 3 and 1
 |       +- 123  - swap 3 and 2
 |       +- 132  - swap 3 and 3
 +- 213          - swap 1 and 2
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 1
 |   |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 2
 |   |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 1
 |   |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 2
 |   |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 3
 |   +- 231      - swap 2 and 3
 |       +- 132  - swap 3 and 1
 |       +- 213  - swap 3 and 2
 |       +- 231  - swap 3 and 3
 +- 321          - swap 1 and 3
     +- 231      - swap 2 and 1
     |   +- 132  - swap 3 and 1
     |   +- 213  - swap 3 and 2
     |   +- 231  - swap 3 and 3
     +- 321      - swap 2 and 2
     |   +- 123  - swap 3 and 1
     |   +- 312  - swap 3 and 2
     |   +- 321  - swap 3 and 3
     +- 312      - swap 2 and 3
         +- 213  - swap 3 and 1
         +- 321  - swap 3 and 2
         +- 312  - swap 3 and 3
```

It is easy to see that 123 is possible 4 times and 132 is possible 5 times out
of the 27 code paths. Assuming a good rng (all paths are equally likely), this
means 132 is more likely to be output than 123. Now let's see the Fisher-Yates
shuffle algorithm.  It is _almost_ the same as our naive algorithm, but for one
simple change. As it iterates through the list, at each element it chooses a
random _later_ element (or itself) rather than just choosing a random element.

```python
def fisheryates(input):
    input = list(input)
    l = len(input)
    for i in range(l):
        j = random.randint(i,l-1)
        input[i], input[j] = input[j], input[i]

    return "".join(input)
```

Intuitively, it would seem that this algorithm is less random. Wouldn't it be
worse to limit yourself to only swapping with later elements? Let's test this
algorithm the same way we tested our naive algorithm.

```python
# Create a counter object
fy_counter = {
    "123": 0,
    "132": 0,
    "213": 0,
    "231": 0,
    "312": 0,
    "321": 0,
}

# Shuffle 10000 times
for _ in range(10000):
    fy_counter[fisheryates("123")] += 1
```


![png](images/output_7_0.png)


As seen in the example above, the output of this function is much more fair.
To see why this is, let's go through the same math we did before.  For the
Fisher-Yates algorithm, let's figure out how many possible code paths there
are.  At the first element, there are `n` possible choices (all elements in the
array), at the second element, there are `n-1` possible choices (ignore all
earlier elements), continue this all the way until the last element.  `n *
(n-1) * (n-2) * (n-3) * ... * 2 * 1 = n!`, which leaves us with `n!` possible
code paths.  This is encouraging since it is the same number of possible
permutations, therefore it is at least *possible* that every output is equally
likely. This is a strong improvement over *impossible*.  For the simple example
`"123"` where `n=3`, there are `3! = 3*2*1 = 6` possible code paths.  With `3!
= 6` different possible permutations of the array, it is clear that 6 divides 6
and the algorithm is not yet proven broken as it was for the naive algorithm.

The possible permutations are as follows

```
123 132 213 231 312 321
```

The possible code paths of the Fisher-Yates algorithms:

```
123
 +- 123          - swap 1 and 1
 |   +- 123      - swap 2 and 2
 |   +- 132      - swap 2 and 3
 |
 +- 213          - swap 1 and 2
 |   +- 213      - swap 2 and 2
 |   +- 231      - swap 2 and 3
 |
 +- 321          - swap 1 and 3
     +- 321      - swap 2 and 2
     +- 312      - swap 2 and 3
```

It is easy to see that every possible output shows up once and is therefore
(assuming a good rng) equally likely.
